Who, who's the other one out there we've got today? Uh,
Laura. She's
the, um, the, oh,
How are you, Barbara?
Mad speaker. Yeah.
That's, um, currently the member of the Tara country.
Actually, if you want the correct title
for this presentation pass.
Right, right. Um, thank you Barbara.
I don't need to introduce, um,
hopefully we've just shorted a, one
of our agreed members at the moment, but they'll hopefully
for, so, um, you usual story.
We've got 10 minutes and, uh, leave time
for questions, hopefully.
Yeah, thank you. I mean, I, I'll allow plenty
of time for questions.
Um, I actually have a, a little map here,
which I wasn't sure how many to bring,
but I've got a little map to bring.
But really they, um, I just wanted to bring on behalf of
not just this community,
but, uh, for a range of communities.
Often when major infrastructures are done,
little rural communities get caught out on the edge, uh,
and roads get closed
and it makes their life, uh, quite difficult.
And so in this situation, um, you'll see on the map, um,
if you, uh, you'll see the ruffle road, uh, there
with the little, little roundabout just at this point.
And I've drawn the circle where it's,
where it's closed in there at that nexus,
at that orange point.
Okay. So previously where people could just go from here,
uh, through, into Rafa, into Hamilton, uh,
to get what they need.
Now, they've actually gotta go absolutely.
The long way round every time
They, so, so where is it that we used to be able to go,
Uh, used to be able to just go through that intersection,
see where that railway line is there?
Yes. Yeah. And so the railway line is really the issue now
that the, the problem with things like this.
Oh, rough. My electric team and I,
after talking to the community, uh, had been to,
this is a nexus between Hamilton City Council,
Waikato District Council, uh, there's a bit of NZTA in here,
and the ultimate was when Kiwi Rail closed,
the little crossing here.
Uh, and it's created a great big drive
around for that community.
Um, and, you know, so Ruffle
Road is now permanently bisected like as in Yes.
So it's, you come, come. So the the two dead ends.
Yeah. There's virtually where I've drawn
that orange dot on the nexus of those four lines there,
you just can't go through there.
So everybody's having to go up on the long way round.
Everything's taking them 25 minutes to go on a trip
where they could just sit down for five minutes.
I, I, I believe that, um,
while the Waikato Expressway has been, uh, great for, uh,
the, uh, the, the triangle between Taronga, Hamilton
and Auckland mm-hmm.
On the west side of it, the, uh,
the funding over time
and over many governments has kind of, uh, run out
for doing the little extras that are supposed to sit
around the edges of it.
And there was a long, a longer term plan mm-hmm.
For, uh, a big a, a picture for people to be able
to get across here a lot quickly
and simply the monies run out.
And so whichever avenue you go to,
or whichever group you try, right.
This, this could be a really long term process to fix
because it's a small community, big projects take over.
Mm-hmm. And the community sees this as a simple, perhaps
if, um, that railway
could just be open under certain conditions
or with extra safety barriers
or something, until a big picture was put in place,
there's the possibility there that, um,
it would make life much easier
for these people in the short term.
So the, the closing of the, when Kiwi Rail stepped in
and closed the crossing, that basically
What was on there before with what?
Presumably they had arms on there before,
Did they? Yeah, they, no,
they just had like a, there,
there was just a, um, lodge, uh, yeah, standard railway.
I mean, you could put arms, there's lots
of things you could do in here
to make it a safe railway crossing.
They decide that that wasn't sufficiently safe
To have just split. Yeah. They just,
they decided it.
Well, they didn't believe it was sufficiently safe, but my
'cause of the, the, um, the, the, the, what's it called?
The, the, the train now The train service now
that goes north from the Hamilton?
Is that, was that what That's what, um, brought this about.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
So, but I believe that, you know,
we have rail crossings in all sorts of parts of the country.
There's gotta be some way to make this safe. Yeah.
Because if we're going to, um,
this won't be the only rural community affected
with little things like this. So, so
What did Rail tell you?
Basically that, um, it wasn't,
they didn't deem it to be safe.
And what about the Minister of Rail?
Uh, well, the Minister of Rail has actually, uh,
only been put into place since we, I haven't been
to the Minister Rail 'cause
of this petition was already in hand.
Right. Um, prior to Christmas.
Um, but that could be a next step as well.
Well, what would you like, what do you see
the petitions committee?
What, where's the remedy from our point of view?
Well, um, you know, I just in terms
of the petitions committee, the reason I bought it here
and the community started a petition is
because a lot of little rural areas
of finding they're just being cut off and closed off.
Mm. And I just wonder if there's an opportunity
for the petitions committee
or some committee in parliament are not only just
with this road, but to have a look at, uh,
what are the sensible arrangements that we can make
for the little offshoot roads when we do
the major developments?
Because it's just, I mean, this could sit like this
for 20 years if we don't do anything,
If they had left just the lights, you know,
like there's plenty of them around the country
where you just come up to it
and there's lights go without arms.
Yeah. So,
but obviously by some formula they've decided
what the extra trains
or is, is there a formula by, and it's,
Oh, I have no idea what the formula is,
but they've just deemed that it's,
they don't believe it's safe, uh, to go for people
to be going driving across that crosslink.
I mean, even if you could open it at certain times a day,
I mean, the trains have a timetable,
But we have train, you know, when you're going,
you're coming south, um, you go over, what is it?
Um, uh, is it, what's the name of the, um, the, the low?
Is it Mana? Yeah, mana between Mwea and Hunterville. Yeah.
You going south through there? Yeah. It's State Highway one.
Yeah. And there's a train crossing there. Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, this is,
Yeah. That's got arms on.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, but just put arms on this
thing. Like, that's ridiculous.
I, I just think, yeah. I just think we need to, I mean,
Kiwi Rail needs to be more open-minded.
Yeah. Uh, and
Well, what we can do is maybe we, we could ask Kiwi Rail
For Yes, I think so. To make
A submission. Yeah. Yeah.
That's a good idea. Yeah. Yeah, yeah.
Yeah. A hundred percent. Yeah.
Because that's where the blockage is.
I mean, there's obviously other, you know, the councils
and the other groups around us,
but really is that railway crossing that's the issue.
Yeah. So we could get them to come in
and explain how they think they might
be able to make that safe.
Yeah, absolutely.
And if you could do that, I would be very happy
to hear their explanation.
Well, we, we, we'll have that discussion afterwards,
but it would seem to be, um,
probably a reasonably logical thing to do, to ask 'em
to come in here and Right. Probably not the minister, but
That's No, no.
We'll, we'll get them to explain enough
and then, you know, will be potential to go
to the minister in the future now
that we have the Minister for rail.
Yeah. Excellent. Well, good.
Any other? Sorry, any other questions for pa? No.
Excellent. Thank You. Asy,
as we would expect from, yes.
Thank you for current MP and a previous mp.
Thank you for taking the time to listen.
Thanks
Jeffrey. Wow.
From a deputy speaker to a Prime Minister.
Welcome to join us. Thank you very much, Jeff.
And thank you. This is, this is your, the committee.
This is the second time I say I was select committee today.
I was just reading that you were, uh,
before the Justice committee this morning.
Yes. Lots of people were there. Indeed.
Fatigable, um, yes. Would be the, uh, the description.
Uh, well, thank you very much again, um,
for agreeing to come here.
This is one of these ones, when the committees heard this,
we were all, um, we were intrigued
and thought, well, there's only really one person we would,
should really hear from, to help us to get an understanding.
And, um, being a good Catholic lad as the chair, um,
I was, I was brought up on this tale that,
um, yes. That the only,
There's a Catholic archbishop involved in
This. The only
hadn't been from Papa.
There wouldn't be any Catholics allowed.
New Zealand would've been a Catholic free zone.
That's right. That was what I was brought up with you.
You can tell me different. Well,
I think that might be right.
Alright, well, okay.
Well, so, um, obviously I think we've got
you down for 20 minutes.
Um, is that right? Um, I
Hope I won't take that long.
You never know, Mr. Chairman.
Depends on the questions, doesn't it? 15 minutes, 25?
Yes. We have actually 25, 30, 15 minutes.
Okay. Well, uh, I want
to thank the committee for inviting me here.
'cause this is a fascinating subject.
Uh, and, um, this book, uh,
which is Hay Al, which is a very good book,
which lead to this petition, but it is by Alistair Reese.
And he is an historian and a theologian.
And he came over to my office at the university
and gave me this, I read it and I talked to him about it.
And, uh, I, I thought, I think it's a competent piece
of work, and I think it's accurate, uh, in,
in a sense, uh, what this does is to,
um, uh, really
make a moral point, uh, a point
that this was a sacred compact.
The treaty was, uh,
and morally the fourth article,
the so-called fourth article, which
was never part of the treaty formally Mm.
Should be legislative form. That's what this petition seeks.
Hmm. Well, I I wanna say that this,
this is a important issue
that I have doubts whether this committee can
rectify this differently for there's reason
that the treaty itself,
three articles in the preamble have not been
enacted into statute law.
And it would be
therefore, very difficult for the petitions committee
recommend that,
that the fourth article should be legislated for by itself.
I don't think that's a viable proposition
that doesn't lessen the moral, uh, force of it or,
or the, um, the accuracy of
what took place at Liang.
Because the missionaries came here very early in 1814,
and they, uh, got tore going,
and they taught Maori to speak
that language and not, not to speak it so much as light it.
And, and, and Maori became very proficient in this.
Uh, and, and it's the Tere version of the,
of the treaty that they rely on.
And, and, and it's different from the version.
And that's one of the most serious problems despite some
of the strange evidence that I heard this morning.
Now, one thing that is relevant to this
is that the,
the specific query is what is a practical action
to recognize the fourth article?
Well, it's, I suppose it might be open to the Parliament
to make a declaration,
but I, I think it's deep water
to get into in current circumstances,
because there's an enormous effort going on in relation
to the, uh, treaty principles.
Bill and I appeared this morning with the QCs
and made a presentation there,
and I think it might be helpful
for the committee if they had a copy of that submission, uh,
of the QCs,
because it makes some very important points, which,
um, this is the submission to the treaty principles.
Yes. I think it's quite relevant though, to you
because of what you are asked to look at.
I mean, what the, uh, council say that there's a,
they seek to redefine the treaties is it's unacceptable.
We've got, they've got a terrific
bollocking from the Qs, the kcs.
Uh, and um, what I said was that
the legislative process that the Parliament adopted
in relation to the 2D principles, bill
was fundamentally defective.
Because a bill is the end
of a policy making process, not the beginning of,
and you should have proper research, you should have
definitive papers, they should be publicly available.
It should be consultation.
There has to be some, you have to put it to Maori and,
and go through a orderly legislative process of the sort
that is standard.
I cannot recall any legislative process like the one
that was adopted for, for the treaty principles bill in, in
my lifetime in this part.
And, and I just think that the process was wrong.
It caused a lot of money to be spent.
It caused 300,000 submissions to be given.
It, it clocked up the parliament with all those submissions.
And I don't think you wanna start in on that road.
So, so I, I hand this paper over
so you are, so you can read it.
Um, and, and, um, I, I, um, I spoke
to it this morning along with a, a, a fellow qc,
and I'm sorry, it's sort of, um, a little bit marked up
by my highlighter.
Mm. But I don't think
that would damage its relevance for you.
I might be able to find another one here in a minute,
but, uh, the, the, the difficulty
that I have, oh, here we are.
Here's a clean one, this of the cloud.
Thank you very much.
Now, the proposition that needs
to be is still just relevant to this committee is,
is what the, uh,
what was said this morning.
The kcs in paragraph seven of the submissions say this,
whether a constitutional reform is required
and how that should incorporate Tater is a longstanding,
complex and contentious issue in this country.
A constructive and good faith
national conversation is appropriate
in light of the history.
This should not be approached.
This should be approached with utmost care and respect.
These issues warrant a thorough
and considered processes involving public education
engagement in consultation.
And they conclude by saying process is everything.
And that's right. So if this committee were
to recommend that, the fourth article of the Cree Treaty,
so-called the so-called fourth article,
which has a very long history.
I mean, it's, it's very interesting
that if one looks at the, um, at
what the wonderful book, uh, that, uh,
Ned Fletcher wrote, uh, it's very useful scholarship,
he said, it's almost inconceivable
that the missionaries would've allowed themselves to be used
to sell the treaty if they had not believed it was in the
best interest of Maori.
And that Hobson and the British government were genuine
in their assurances.
Mm-hmm. And, and I think that's right.
They, the, the missionary had real power if they'd been here
longer than, than Hobson, who only just got there.
Uh, and, and they were trusted.
And so they, they were very influential.
But, but the argument at this juncture is not the,
it's, it's not a legal argument.
It's a moral argument.
The question of what should be in the law is a different
question, I think, and for the, the, for the commission,
for the committee to recommend that this, uh,
petition receive a very favorable recommendation in the
fourth article be enacted would be a strange thing to do
when the other three articles of the treaty
are not dealt with in that way.
They may be eventually, but that's a different issue.
And so, I, I just, I just think that the, that the
select committee should be quite careful about this
unless we have another fuss
that we thought we've just been having. Mm-hmm.
Mind you, you might argue this would be an easy one.
Well, Yes. And in some, the reason
to almost keep it simple, 'cause it would,
it would be a relatively easy one.
There wouldn't be much contentious about it, would there?
Well, wouldn't imagine it would be
because people would say, why aren't the others
three articles there as,
As a, as a standalone,
I'm saying, and standalone is pretty dangerous and,
and kind of raises expectations, which, which
you, you, there would be amendments that you would have
to add the other articles.
Yeah. And, and, and so I, I, I think I wouldn't counsel
that course, Mr.
Chairman, but, but I do say to you
that this is a valid issue
and it's an important issue that it really, it really needs
to be sorted out.
Because if you look at the legislative process,
which the cabinet manual talks about,
cabinet manual 2017, paragraph 7.65, which
doesn't seem to receive the sort of weight that it should.
Cabinet manual tells you how to do legislation.
And a lot of what it tells you to do legislation wasn't done
with the treaty principles bill.
Uh, and, and, um,
one reason why the cabinet manual, uh,
at 7, 6 5 talks about the treaty is, is
that the ministers must confirm that all bills comply
with certain legal principles
and obligations when submitting bids per bill
to be included in the legislative program.
In particular, ministers must draw attention to any aspects
of the bill that have implications for,
or may be affected by the principles of the treaty.
Well, I wonder if that was done for this bill,
because I've seen no evidence of it.
But what, what I'm really saying to you is that the sort
of warning that is in there would suggest you've gotta go
through a more elaborate process than a petitions could be,
uh, to, to, to get this
proposal up, if you see what I mean.
Mm-hmm. So, um, the reason why that is in the cabinet manual
is that one,
expect an orthodox policy process
before the introduction of a bill deals with the treaty.
Uh, and in that process you would've, deep analysis,
you'd have, uh, the taking the decisions
after you had analysis taken advice,
got the policy options up, uh,
have interdepartmental consultations,
consultations with Maori.
That's what the proper legislative process is,
and bridging it from something that this sort is really.
So, um, I, I think that
what I would say is that the,
it's not really appropriate to recommend legislation
for the force in my constitutional view, at this juncture.
Beyond that point, I think the committee needs
to seek advice from the clerk's office about the scope of
what else it may decide to do, if any.
And, and I I'm not sure about that,
but there are things that you could do
because the missionaries were active
and influential, I think, in helping the GT be accepted.
And the netcher point, I think is an important one.
And there are ways
of addressing the relevant issues if the
committee was so minded.
For example, let me just say a little bit about the, uh,
techniques of deliberative democracy,
which involves citizens participation and,
and random choice of citizens and proper consultations.
The Irish have done this very well for a number of things.
We haven't tried it much except at the local government
level in New Zealand.
But if you're going to consult seriously
with the public properly, you've gotta spend money
and go into some depth.
Otherwise you'll get the sort of thing that you've had.
Now, um, there is in a book that's written
by my son in 2008 called The Treaty White Tongue in New
Zealand's Law and Constitution, Matthew Sr.
Parliament Victoria University Press 2008.
He lists a series of approaches one could take to this.
And if you were minded to go down that road,
he's got it pages 359
and following pages, the current constitutional place,
I will treat you by Tony,
and he's got the future, what you,
how you deal with it in the future.
There's quite a lot of problems with test of the status quo.
Um, but there's quite a lot of problems in removing
from the status quo.
Is the parliament, is he
Saying he wrote this in 2008?
Yes. Yes, he did.
This is being the parliamentary library, I'm sure. Right?
Wow. Yeah, it's a big, it's a big book
and it's, uh, been quite important
and there's been a lot of Jewish prudence on this
and litigation in the courts.
And, and so, you know,
those things have gotta inform all of this.
Mm-hmm. And, and, um, I mean, the committee might not want
to do that, but it is a possibility
that the committee is open to it,
I think if the clerk's office thinks it's in scope.
Mm-hmm. But, uh,
Or well look, I think now any other questions
from the Yes,
Mr. Fleming? Yes.
Um, one is directly related to this conversation
and one is just an adjunct
because it was something that I think that came
to mind when you, when you referenced needs book.
Mm-hmm. Um, first of all, uh,
and I think you're probably just touching on this in terms
of referencing, um, your son's book there.
Yeah. But I mean, I, in,
in, in, in, in terms of your, your long involvement
with those, with this place, both directly
and indirectly, have you seen times where there has been,
um, um, consideration of, of, uh,
putting the, the treaty, um, within,
within our legislative and constitutional family?
Um, the, um, I've looked at this quite closely.
I remember discussing it with Professor Quentin Baxter,
where, when, who was my colleague at the university when
Matt Ratta did, uh, the Treaty White Tangi Act, which led
to the way Tangi tribunal set.
And he was talking to me about it, uh, then.
And, uh, what happened was he thought it was a good idea
to put your water, your, your foot into the water gradually
and let it seep around to see what happened.
And all the, um, uh,
reports of the Tang Tribunal, which are numerous
and which have been very useful, especially the ones
that produce settlements, uh, that, that removed a lot
of the aggravation from this area.
They're just about complete.
There's an enormous one in Northland, uh,
which still remains to be dealt to, I think.
Yeah. Uh, but,
but you know, you don't want to get into this
unless you, you, when you put your hand to this plow,
you're gonna have to go on plowing and it won't be
Yeah. Well
that's, that probably a fairly good bit of advice
to leave us on.
I mean, obviously I feel we could be still here at nine
o'clock tonight and be learning a lot,
but, uh, I think just, um, thank you very much
for your second, second visit
to a select committee today. Yes. And, uh, that's
Right. I quite enjoy it, really.
Yeah, thank
You. And we, as much
as we've enjoyed having
you, so thank you very
Much. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
I might listen again to more submissions. I'll listen,
As I say with half the committee is actually Catholic,
so you know, know, obviously it, uh, three quarters.
Three quarters, Bishop, I tell you, three, three quarters
of the committee are actually Catholics.
I'm the, I'm the only Anglican here protest, basically.
Okay. Yes. They had a big social conscience.
Much bigger than, what do you mean then?
Did well, alright, look, thank you very much. Alright.
Alright. Now, um, we just now come to Laura, um, Ansil.
Um, please welcome to the table, Laura for your,
and thank you for your patience too.
Just, uh, I now I think you've just,
now we didn't introduce, we knew that, uh,
but just introduce Greg oconnor, the,
uh, chair of the committee.
Greg, nice to meet you.
You person Paulo, um, national MP for newly
Good France Hernandez, green Blist MP based in
You. Alright.
Well look, thank you, um, for making the time.
I think we've now used in New Zealand, you're heading back
to UK shortly, is that right?
Yeah, yeah, tomorrow. So, so please we're able to, uh,
get you here, um, that we've read your submissions.
Um, again, uh,
it's one thing about this petitions committee, um,
we do go places that, uh,
we probably wouldn't have gone otherwise.
And so an understanding of just part of our whole history
as you previously heard.
Um, so very interested to hear from you
and it'd be good if you can leave some time for questions.
Koto Koto 10 Coto call Laura Ansel.
Hello everyone. My name is Laura Ansel.
Um, I'd like to start my submission to you today
by showing you three photos.
Um, this is my dad Billy, and he was a war baby.
He was born in England in 1946 at the end of World War ii.
And this is his biological father
and my grandfather, uh, a New Zealander who was serving
with the Royal New Zealand Air Force, uh,
in England when he met my grandmother.
And my dad was conceived.
Um, but my grandfather was repatriated back to New Zealand
before my grandmother knew that she was pregnant.
And my dad therefore was born out of wedlock
and unfortunately, he never got
to know his biological father.
Um, suddenly my dad passed away when I was 17.
And on his deathbed, my mom
and I made, made him a promise
that we would find his biological family.
So to cut a very long story short, using DNA
extracted from biopsy samples that were stored in hospitals,
um, from both my deceased grandfather
and my deceased father, I was able to prove their father
and son relationship and our lineage
and connection with ERO New Zealand.
So it was quite an unusual thing to do.
Um, but this is something that I'm very proud
of my connection with this country
and my longstanding family lineage here.
And I'm extremely grateful for my new found family too.
Um, so I was pretty shocked when the Department
of Internal Affairs told me that
because my dad was born outta wedlock,
that he would not have had a claim to citizenship
by dissent, uh, through his New Zealand father.
And then that has had a knock on effect for me today.
So the department acknowledged
that wedlock was an outdated concept
and they noted that it wasn't part
of our citizenship act today, the 19 77 1.
Um, but what about those people born before then?
So this was what led me to start this petition
because the consequences of those historical
attitudes echo
through generations preventing some individuals from
rightfully claiming their New Zealand heritage today.
Um, you will have seen the submission by the department.
Um, and on page five of that, um, it said
that it was unaware of other cases like mine,
and that is likely that my case was uncommon.
However, in the DIA submission to the minister
in reference to my application in 2023, it said,
and I quote, the department is aware
of older citizenship cases with multi-generational claims
which had failed due to the issue of illegitimacy.
And it said, while Laura's circumstances are exceptional
to her, they are not necessarily rare
or outta the ordinary to the department.
So you can see that these two statements
by the DIA are contradictory.
Now I totally acknowledge that the law at the time
of my dad's birth was operating as the departments say,
um, as it was intended.
In fact, I've read the parliamentary debates from 1948 in
great detail, and the purpose
of the wedlock requirement was because back then birth
and marriage certificates were the only way
to truly prove your connection and your lineage
and where you came from.
Sure. But today we have DNA,
so it took me two citizenship applications, a complaint
to the Human Rights Commission and a total of three years
and eight months of trying to convince the DIA
of my connection with New Zealand
before I was finally granted citizenship.
So I have no skin in this game now
because my fight, um, was eventually won,
but it didn't need to be this difficult for my identity
and my heritage to be formally acknowledged in a way
that it would've been had my dad been
born to married parents.
Um, I don't feel that my dad was any less of a person
because of those circumstances.
Um, but the reality is that he
and I were treated differently to legitimate people,
which is why I feel a duty to highlight
and, um, change this inequity.
Just going back to the submission from the DIA as well,
I'd like to draw your attention to, um,
their comment explaining that there is a pathway
by nine one C for those
who are born overseas and out of wedlock.
My submission to you is
that this pathway is not actually fit for purpose
when it comes to familial claims of lineage.
The department's very own policy says
that nine one C is a very difficult requirement to meet,
and exceptional circumstances should be
relatively rare and uncommon.
And my lived experience proves that
because I initially applied under nine one C
and was declined after the DIA concluded
that my circumstances were not consistent
with the department's interpretation.
So again, there seems
to be two different lines coming from the department.
Um, and they said that there was no evidence
to support a benefit
or advantage to New Zealand by making me a citizen.
So I made the complaint to the Human Rights Commission
that I was being discriminated against based on the marital
status of my grandparents.
Um, and the DIA suggested that I reapplied under nine one C
had it not been for the fact that my dad was born out
of wedlock, I would've met all the criteria for nine one B,
which is the route that acknowledges familial connection,
f**k papa and represents identity.
But I was excluded from applying in this way simply
because my dad was considered illegitimate
and that really hurt.
Um, so this is, this issue isn't about rewriting history,
nor is it about granting automatic citizenship to all
who claim distant ancestry,
but it is about acknowledging an unfair discrepancy
and providing a proper pathway for those affected
to apply for citizenship.
It's a matter of equity and ensuring people who would
otherwise be eligible for New Zealand citizenship,
that they're not arbitrarily excluded due to circumstances
that were entirely out of their control,
whether their parents were married
or not at the time of their birth.
And I think these are, you know, long considered
irrelevant issues within our modern society in New Zealand.
So thank you for listening. Alright,
Thank you. We've just got time
for questions.
Um, thank you very much Laura.
So did you, obviously the Human Rights Commission then
obviously, um, uh, had a word to DIA
or what sent instructions to DIA saying
that they should reevaluate your
Case? Yeah, so
they wrote to them asking them
to participate in mediation.
Okay. Um, because the Human Rights Commission thought,
you know, that I have points, so it was worth,
um, trying to resolve.
Um, but the, I actually have the response, the DIA wrote
to the Human Rights Commission saying, um,
that they didn't think that it was unlawful discrimination
and that they didn't have to participate in mediation.
Um, but they said to reapply,
which I did, and then it was granted.
Um, but I think that this really needs looking at this issue
because I think it is widely accepted that yeah.
The marital status. Can I
Ask a thought? Are you, are
you aware of the
situation in the United Kingdom?
Yeah. Yeah. So I did a bit of research on that.
Um, and in July last year,
the home office, um, published guidance, um,
with the requirements that you must meet
and also in terms of dissent, it gives an example here.
So they have provided now a proper pathway
if the only reason you were not allowed to claim citizenship
by dissent was
because either you could only pass it through your father
or your mother like to, to make it fair and equal.
Right. So they even give an example here, Katie,
who was born in Canada in 1982, her mum was born in the uk
and if women had been able to pass on citizenship, which at
that time they weren't, um, Katie would've been a citizen
of the UK at birth
and would now be a British British citizen.
So the UK have actually now got a route that you can apply,
um, if you'd been previously excluded
because of the legislation at that time, which
required either wedlock
or you could only do it through your mother or father.
And just one other question.
Are you aware with um, donors, um, with now with
situation, because clearly with the DNA, um,
if you're a donor, um,
and your, um, sperm has gone overseas, would that apply
Overseas? I don't know, but there
are, there is work going on
to basically you have to be the legal parent at the time
of the birth and there's also work to, um,
like if you then go and adopt a child whether they would
claim your citizenship.
Um, so there are, yeah, it's, it's an area
that's really evolving because of DNA
and how technology is advancing.
It may well be the, uh,
officials down to help us with that one.
So I've got time. Yeah,
Just gonna, uh, so was your case granted then,
was your application approved then
of the discretion of the minister? Yes.
Okay. Under nine one C,
which is exceptional circumstances.
Yes. Yeah. And it was very important to me
and that I applied, I wanted to apply to nine one B,
which is specifically there
For your Familial connections,
but I couldn't apply even though I met all
of its criteria simply because my dad had been born
Out welock. Sure.
Yeah. So, and that was in the DIA submission.
I guess we we'll speak to soon because there was Yeah.
Is what they're suggesting is that, is that under,
under nine one C that there is the road, uh,
or there is the avenue available as experienced by you,
but I imagine yeah, your, your point that's insufficient.
Yeah. Well it's Sort of
like you are treated differently. Yes. Again,
Yeah.
Or was there anything else?
Alright, look, thank you very much. Thank you.
Well explained and uh, again, um, with this committee,
we love having our eyes open
to issues we have known nothing knew very little about.
So thank you. Thank you for the research you've done
and, uh, and you are now in New Zealand and British citizen.
I am, yeah. Citizenship. Very proud.
Wonderful. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Now if we can have our, um, officials
to the table please.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Jeffrey.
Oh you are welcome. Your, I as a young lawyer,
I representing a band free.
I legitimate g Dear mother was an alcoholic
and I took a case in front of the Chief Justice, uh,
gathered a lot of evidence and he overturned 200 years
of British president in a three page as system
to give the private custody.
We've got another petition later on
those lines actually, funnily enough.
Okay. We might have you in every week. Thank you.
Thank you again very much. Come.
Alright. Alright. Thank you very much. Thank you patients.
And, uh, think, uh, you've heard us introduce ourselves, so,
um, very keen to hear from you.
So who's, who's leading today?
Ah, leading. Um, I just wanna start by acknowledging
The sense, um, the journey we've been on
and I know that's been a long, long one for you.
Um,
And appreciate the fact that you've,
You've undertaken To get here.
Um, I think we
will take the submission as read. Right?
Thank you. You, Julia, is it?
Yes. Julia. Sorry. Julia Taylor from department.
No, it was an unusual introduction.
I think it's not often you have a, uh,
a previous ex prime minister come
and direct you as you about to start.
So we'll forgive you that,
My apologies. Um,
sorry. I'll pass on
to my colleagues to introduce themselves.
I'm Claire O'Connor, uh, principal Solicitor at DIA.
I'm she Redpath Senior Policy Analyst. Welcome.
Does, does the committee have any questions
for the department or do you want me
to go into the questions that you asked The iel? Alright,
Well we can, okay. Well great.
Yes, I'd be keen for you to go No,
to go into those questions. Yeah,
Yeah. The ones that
came up here.
Okay. Um, I, I don't want to talk to the submission
to the minister here because it's a, an open public hearing
and I'm conscious that it's being live streamed.
Um, but we can provide information
to the committee if they do want to know the process
that we went through for former Z sales, um, application,
what I will say that we have now changed how we deal
with these types of applications.
And, but again, acknowledging the, the fight,
I don't think there's any other way
that MSEL has, has gone through.
Um, so there is a lot of discretion in the Citizenship Act.
We have requirements that are set out
and then essentially the Minister
of Internal Affairs can waive all
or any of those requirements as they see fit.
Um, it is
comparatively rare.
So of the 25,000 odd citizenship applications we receive
every year about 500 go to a, a submission
where the minister is asked to waive
or not waive requirements
or she is asked to consider waiving, uh, and decides whether
or not to, to grant citizenship.
Um, on the donor question,
donors do not pass citizenship in New Zealand.
Uh, but you may be aware there's surrogacy law reform
that's being looked at and there are questions of citizens,
So, sorry. So donors
would not
Do not pass citizenship on. Right.
Okay. Is that enshrined or is that in, is that,
I'll pass to my legal colleague for that one.
Uh, it's in the status
of children act there's specific provisions relating to, um,
a non, uh, a partner, uh, donor who is not the partner
of the person getting pregnant.
Um, and they specifically cannot pass their citizenship on,
they've got no legal rights for
The child. And so that's the,
that's specifically
for the donor situation
or is that even for a Well, that goes
beyond a little bit broader than just a donor
Situation. It's for, for for
donors, for ga donors, for gat donors.
So either,
Right. Okay.
I think that was the questions that you,
you the committee asked.
Is there anything else you wanna ask of the department,
Mr. Chair? Uh,
just, uh, on that, uh, a donor,
uh, isn't allowed to pass on
because there is still relationship. Is that the
Yeah, so the legal relationship is, it's like severed
between Yes.
The, the donor and the child just says with adoption
it's severed between a birth parent and the child.
Mm-hmm.
Well, what about adoption?
Because presumably in your case, Ms.
Ansel, there was a,
would've been an adoption involved? There wasn't,
My father was not a Former.
So, okay. In the, so in the situation
where had he been adopted that wouldn't have then
by new, he would not have been eligible.
Is that right? Even with the familial,
I I think it's a, on UK law
there's preservation in New Zealand
that you keep the citizenship
of your adoptive parents, I think,
but I'm not sure if that's the same in every jurisdiction.
Yeah. I mean I know if we're sort
of going a little bit broader, but certainly in in this case
it, it has nothing has changed.
Um, from when Laura, if,
if has it, nothing has changed legally since um,
Laura has brought this to light.
It's just now it would still be any new cases would be still
under see May.
Yes. Yes.
Um, what the Citizenship Act does enable, though, is
for the minister to consider any conditions,
any circumstances they consider relevant.
So they can, the approach to these types
of cases today,
and particularly where there's DNA evidence, um, is
to take the provisions of nine one B
and consider them under nine one C.
That makes sense. So, so there is a connection obviously
to New Zealand where you are the child of a citizen
by dissent and that, um, department use that regardless
of whether the citizen by dissent had that formal status,
um, or whether that was, um, not given
because of the provisions of the 1948 act. Right.
Can I, So is there, uh, I imagine what, um,
Laura will be thinking was that yes, there is a,
so there is an avenue for the, for, um, an injustice
to be corrected because she's testimony to that.
But I think what she's asking for is for the injustice
to be removed, um, right up front.
So could we move for a moment to the, to the,
in your submission, you, um, spoke about the, uh, obviously
for the change to happen actually requires, um, um, a, a,
uh, a change in the law
and there is no, uh, legislation, uh,
at the moment for the house.
Um, are you aware of, of any kind of review, pending review,
whether it's a year, two, three years from now of any kind
of legislative review that this, that this relatively minor
but pretty important change in terms
of its effect on the people
that it could be included in? Mm.
There are no current plans to, um,
what the citizenship be.
Right? I mean, so DNA has changed everything, hasn't it?
That that's, that's really what gone from.
So, and also what's changed is the marital status now would
be, is not a, is not a factor.
Yeah, absolutely. That, that's where we've, I suppose
that's been the, the precedent value of suit of,
of Laura's circumstances.
Um, I, what I would say is the 1977 act removed
the need for the parents to be married for that, that status
to, for a child to be a citizen by descent.
So, um, it it's comparatively rare.
Yes. 'cause it's, it's just,
And it's 48 to 77 Yeah.
Cohort. Yeah.
But if the, if, if a piece of law was to be, uh, what was
to come before, uh, the, um, the department and the
before the house in the, in the, in the future, whether
that's near future or long way, way, there's no reason
that you guys would object to a little
surgical change there being made to address the issue.
The department hasn't had the opportunity do a
full policy analysis.
So we'd need to undertake the work
to make sure, okay, thank you.
That if there was good reason to do it
and it wouldn't create any cons.
Consequences. So if we were granting citizenship,
if there was an automatic, for example, provision
of citizenship, you don't know what the impact could be on
those people who have not had it previously.
So sure there are countries
that don't enable dual citizenship.
It could, could impact that status
or positions of power
that don't enable dual citizenship like a,
an Australian Right.
Member of parliament. Yes. So it's, it's tricky.
It's always tricky. You want it to be on application so
that the person's making a conscious
decision to apply. Mm-hmm.
And, and also just,
so you gotta be very careful if you don't create,
preserve perverse incentives too.
Yes. That there will be countries that if someone were to go
and inseminate many people
in a certain place, they could theoretically end up all
with the right to come to New Zealand.
It is something we have talked about as part
of surrogacy law reform. Yeah.
If you're not careful and look, let's face it, it's, I'm
probably a detective for too long,
but I think, you know, is I I think sometimes think the
worst of human that could happen, she happen too.
We had a 2005 change to the citizenship to prevent not
that circumstance, but uh, prior to 2005,
everyone born in New Zealand was automatically a New Zealand
citizen regardless of the status of their parents.
Uh, then 2005 that changed so that the parent one
or both parents had to be a New Zealand
permanent resident or citizen.
And that was because people were
on country shopping for citizenship.
Yeah. Or the
debates happening in the states at the moment.
Mm-hmm. Alright, well, members, anything else clarified?
Thank you. Great. Well look, thank you again very much.
As I say, fascinating topic.
So thank you for Laura, for you bringing it to us.
And I, I guess probably as officials yourselves,
you're probably quite an interesting one to deal with too.
Yes. Learning.
Well, you And,
and we had next prime minister helping us out.
So, you know, it's, it's an always an interesting place.
So thanks very much. Thank you.
So we'll, we'll go back into private now.
Thanks when you are on a flight then.
Laura, you heading back very shortly are the UK Yeah,
tomorrow.